[inspirational music playing]
[ball hitting racket]
[distant indistinct chatter]
[radio reporter] Today the skies
will be even clearer than in recent days.
And temperatures will be much higher.
The winds will calm down.
[Rafa] The first time I went to play
an official tennis tournament.
I was. I think. 7 years old.
I played with someone who was. like. 11.
So. I was nervous. of course.
But my uncle Toni was a coach
who had a great influence on me.
And helped me with everything.
[Toni] Rafael was a little nervous
before taking the court.
So. I said to Rafael.
"If your opponent is much better than you.
I'll make it rain."
And he asked. "You can make it rain?"
And I said.
"Of course I can make it rain."
[thunder rumbling]
[Rafa] Of course.
I had great respect for him.
And I admired him so much
when I was very young. you know?
I always trusted him.
[applause]
[Rafa] The match begins…
1-0. 2-0. 3-0. 4-0 for the other guy.
[applause]
But then. I start to come back.
[grunts]
4-1. 4-2. 4-3…
[applause and cheers]
[thunder rumbling]
[Rafa] It starts raining.
And I secretly go to tell Toni.
"Toni. I think you could stop the rain.
because I think I could beat him."
[church bell ringing]
[birds chirping]
[commentator]
Rafa Nadal announced at 6:20 p.m.
that he will not be playing
in the Monte-Carlo tennis tournament.
Rafa has been dropping out
of tournaments one-by-one.
First Doha. then Indian Wells.
now Monte-Carlo.
And now. Roland-Garros is almost upon us.
and we haven't seen Rafa
practically all year.
There's no time left.
[intriguing music playing]
[man] It hurts here?
[Rafa] It's more like here.
[man] Around this area?
- It could be. right?
- Sure.
That's where it hurts the most.
[Gustavo] What do you think about the…?
[whispers] I don't think
we'll find anything.
- What?
- I don't think we'll find much.
But he already thinks
that he may have a chance…
The man is… insatiable.
But he's not ready to push yet.
Yeah.
[Costa] Will you make it to Barcelona?
- We'll see. I don't know about Barcelona.
- He may not make it.
[Moyá] I don't think so.
But he thinks that if he's able to train
for a full week. he's ready to compete.
I don't fully agree.
- He's gonna get injured there.
- [Costa] Yeah. it's crazy.
- Makes no sense.
- Yeah. very true.
[Rafa] Rafelet. ready?
[laughs]
[Costa] You want him to go?
You think he should go?
- No.
- Do you?
I wouldn't allow it.
- Sure you wouldn't go?
- I wouldn't go.
- Yeah. okay.
- I told him yesterday.
- I mean…
- I told him today.
I think he needs to do some reflecting
at home tonight and ask himself.
"What am I playing for?"
- An Eskimo kiss?
- Papa!
Yeah. daddy.
[music builds]
[reporter 1] Where's Nadal?
[reporter 2] In Barcelona.
He's already training.
[reporter 3] Yeah. sure.
but that doesn't mean he'll compete.
So. by Friday.
Rafa Nadal has to decide
if he'll play Barcelona or not.
- [Rafa grunts]
- [ball hitting racket]
- I can push harder. I'm not feeling pain.
- [Maymó] Like yesterday. Easy.
Shit. I have to do
a little more. I need to.
I mean…
I need to feel like. "Here I go."
- Right.
- You know? "Go."
[Moyá] What about 70%?
Charlie. I don't know
if I should do it or not.
[Moyá] Listen. we need
to keep everything under control.
Here I go.
[Moyá] But you have to be careful. man.
[Rafa] Till it breaks.
[dramatic music playing]
[Moyá] He's very demanding with himself.
But if he gets injured again.
then there's nothing.
So. these days.
part of our job is to stop him.
He's been pushed
for so many years to give 100%.
And that made him who he is.
[serene music playing]
[Rafa] Since I was a kid.
I enjoyed challenges.
They gave me motivation.
I liked things that were difficult.
But this is because
Toni taught me to be this way.
[Toni] It's not easy. huh? One more time.
I was a demanding coach.
Go! Come on. hit it!
But I was hard on Rafael
because I had great respect for him.
Again. You need to give him hell.
And because he was my nephew.
[music fades]
Oh. no. Let's go. champ! Come on.
[Colom] When Toni and Rafael trained.
tensions were very high.
[Toni] Rafael. don't hit it so low.
"Rafa. turn around."
"Rafa. move." "Rafa. finish the shot"…
From ball one.
He was constantly correcting him.
Trying to create
the maximum amount of stress.
Again! Come on!
I felt much less pressure
when playing against any opponent
than when training with Toni.
[Toni] Again!
When I missed a ball. he'd ask.
"Why did you miss?"
I was scared of making another mistake.
During the first hour of training.
no water.
One hour without drinking.
So. they would learn to suffer a little.
Some coaches rebelled against me
because they felt that was barbaric.
I remember.
in the first round of a tournament.
I fell and broke this finger.
[Toni] When this happened to his finger.
I told Rafael. "Keep playing."
"Play for as long as you can."
I won the tournament.
But I had to wear a cast for a month.
If you had asked me at that time.
"Do you agree with all this?"
I would have said. "No. I don't like it."
It was a philosophy.
"Learn how to suffer through a sport."
I always said the same thing to him.
"Rafa. you don't have to play."
"No. I'm fine. Mom.
I really like doing this."
Last one.
I only remember one time
I felt like I couldn't take it anymore.
and said. "Toni. um…
I'm sorry. but I can't go on."
I left the court.
Mentally destroyed and crying.
But I never went home crying.
My father would ask. "How was practice?"
I'd say. "Fine. good."
"Bad."
But that was it.
I never would have wanted
for my dad to go up to Toni
and ask him to go easy on me.
I would have felt
like I was letting Toni down.
I'd be a person
who wasn't strong enough to endure.
I always knew
that he wanted the best for me.
He wanted to make me succeed.
And he believed that the right way was…
that one.
[inspirational music playing]
Pushing me to the limit.
[commentator] He's done it!
[Toni] I am not satisfied
with him being a good player.
[commentator] Nadal takes
his second Roland-Garros title.
[Toni] I encourage him
to always dig for something more.
[music fades]
[Maymó] When I started working with them.
Rafa had somehow internalized that
he was not good enough.
It is something inside of Toni.
who truly believes
that if you just stay
as a great clay court champion.
you are somehow an incomplete champion.
[ethereal music playing]
[Maymó] And so.
the legend had been created
that Wimbledon was the tournament
you had to win.
Win that and you become
an immortal tennis legend.
[interviewer] What's the tournament
that you'd prefer to win?
Wimbledon. but it's very tough
and you have to work hard.
That was the dream. that was the goal.
It had been more than 40 years
since a Spaniard had won there.
[Maymó] It seemed that Spaniards
were not capable of winning on grass.
That's probably why it appeared
to be something magical and unattainable.
[news reporter] Heading the field.
fresh from his triumph in Paris.
the two-time French Open champion.
Rafael Nadal.
The question is.
can the King of Clay master the grass?
[Rafa] The previous year.
I hadn't played very well.
[commentator 1]
Needs to learn a lot on this grass court.
[commentator 2] He wishes
he was here with his football boots.
- [commentator 1 laughs]
- Don't laugh.
[commentator 1] What? It's funny.
He really slips all the time.
They seemed to be two different sports.
Clay was more of a game of strength.
grit. of fighting.
Grass was more elegant…
and for people who played with more…
technique.
[commentator]
Possibly the greatest player of all time.
Roger Federer.
[crowd cheering loudly]
[Toni] I don't know of any athlete
who has managed to play
their sport so elegantly.
[smooth delicate music playing]
[Toni] It seemed like
he was floating everywhere.
You could have placed him in a ballet.
Federer is above all.
[commentator 1] There's such competition
in men's tennis. such strength and depth.
and yet Federer is just
head and shoulders above the rest.
[commentator 2]
Number one for 84 weeks straight.
[music builds]
[commentator 3] Federer
is the best man on the planet.
[Roger] I won my first Grand Slam in 2003.
2004. I won three.
And then. 2005. I barely lost matches.
[commentator 1]
Six straight Grand Slam finals.
Every one he has been in.
Roger Federer has won.
[commentator 2] How much more
can this guy achieve?
[interviewer] When you think
you can't get any better. you do.
Well. it seems like it. yeah.
[laughter and applause]
I guess you could say
I was in a bit of a league of my own.
[news reporter] Roger Federer is still
on track to win the men's singles title
for the fourth straight year.
[moderator]
Good morning. ladies and gentlemen.
It gives me great pleasure
to present Roger Federer.
three-time Wimbledon champion.
defending champion.
[interviewer] Do you feel like a man
on the brink of Wimbledon history?
I feel very. actually. very good.
I'm playing very well at the moment.
And it's a…
just a matter of being consistent.
So. for Rafa.
it was the ultimate challenge…
to win Wimbledon.
To beat Federer.
and to beat Federer at Wimbledon.
[tense music playing]
- [crowd cheering]
- [umpire] Game. set. match to Nadal.
[interviewer] What would make it
a good tournament this year?
Well. I think
if he got through three or four rounds.
that would be good.
[tense music continues]
[crowd cheering]
[interviewer] What if this
were to come to a final
between you and Rafael Nadal?
Obviously. if he made the final.
that would be quite a surprise to many.
[commentator] You see
a guy learning on the spot.
He's getting better each match.
[commentator 1] It looks like
a Rafael Nadal-Roger Federer final
is shaping up.
[commentator 2] No one thought
he'd be in the Wimbledon final.
[Rafa] On grass.
I didn't feel I was at Roger's level yet.
He had many things
in which he was better than me.
Toni kept reminding me of that.
[Toni] Hey. did you see
how he made that last one drop?
I'd say to him. "Rafael.
Federer has a better forehand.
backhand. volley.
and serves better than you."
I said. "If you want. I can lie to you.
but Federer is not going to lie to us."
[Maymó] Toni always
put Federer above Rafa.
And I think that. in a way.
Toni used that as motivation
so that Rafa would keep thinking
that they hadn't reached their limit.
[tense music builds]
[clapping. cheering]
[commentator 2] Roger Federer
now walks onto the court he owns.
This grass of Center Court.
He has been utterly dominant here
for the fourth straight year.
Forty-seven straight wins
on the surface that best suits
his all-court artistry.
[tense music playing]
[crowd cheering]
[Roger] In that moment.
I knew he was extremely good.
But. uh. you could still see
he was a little raw on grass.
[crowd exclaims]
He was maybe a bit frustrated
when there was no rhythm.
[crowd cheering]
His forehand wasn't as effective.
[cheers]
[Roger] You could see
he had some figuring out to do.
[line] Out!
- Yes!
- [crowd cheering]
[interviewer] …On this blazer.
the three rackets with three trophies.
You're going to need
a bigger pocket next year.
Yeah. well. it's gotta go.
because three seems not good enough.
I would just like to say that. uh.
it's a great tournament for Rafael and…
I honestly didn't think
he was going to play the finals this week.
but it's a fantastic effort.
so congratulations for coming so far.
[cheering. whistling]
[interviewer] Great champion.
Congratulations. Roger Federer.
[cheering fades]
Having someone like Roger in front of you.
I think it makes
the path look much clearer.
You'll have to push yourself
to the limit in everything.
[interviewer] What can you tell Rafael.
now that the match is over?
Well. I always say to him
that he needs to keep improving.
[interviewer] You see him
winning Wimbledon next year?
[Toni] No. not at all. I don't see him as…
as champion. not at all.
We have to train more. we have to improve.
I told Rafael.
"You have to do something extra."
"You have to go closer to the limit."
"You have to suffer."
[music fades]
I think I hurt myself during training.
Ugh. it's a bit of a bitch.
It's in a shitty area.
- [Maymó] Where?
- I can't bend my damn finger.
[Maymó] I don't think that's going away.
A little more.
Like this.
[soft expectant music playing]
[commentator] Very important news.
extremely important.
Rafa Nadal will be playing.
It will be at the Godó.
It'll be at 4:00 p.m.
[Maymó] We have a pretty big problem.
He can't play at 80%.
Rafa is 0 or 100.
- That's why he's so successful.
- Yes.
I'm sure.
- [grunts]
- [ball hitting racket]
Not just sure. Very sure.
[Gustavo] Do you see that look?
[Marc] He looks a bit concerned.
[Moyá] Rafael. is it getting worse?
I mean. now that you've warmed up.
does it feel better or not?
I feel nothing.
- But were you feeling it?
- When?
In your daily life.
You haven't felt worse.
or haven't felt anything?
No. I haven't felt anything.
[emotional music playing]
[Maymó] What we all want
is to get to Roland-Garros
in the best possible shape.
But if he wants to keep going.
how are we going to stop him?
[emotional music continues]
[Maymó] I remember that.
in many training sessions.
basically all of them.
we would have problems with his foot.
Meaning. he was in pain.
We had to stop at times.
But Rafa likes to suffer.
Then he gets the feeling
that he has pushed himself to the limit.
[grunts]
It's fine.
I swear. it's fine.
I haven't felt anything. For real.
[Maymó] I think that Rafa. in some way.
feels like he's obligated
not to let down
the people who believe in Rafa Nadal.
I think he's a bit
of a slave to that situation.
But that also gives him
the strength to keep going.
[music fades]
[cheering]
[resolute music playing]
[commentator]
Sixty consecutive victories on clay.
[interviewer] A rivalry
between you and Nadal
would be a great thing for tennis.
- Would it not?
- I agree. yes.
I think. uh. sports
sometimes tend to need rivalries as well.
[resolute music continues]
The rivalry was such a huge thing.
it crossed over into the general culture.
In a big way.
[commentator] From now on.
the match everyone will be waiting for
will be Nadal-Federer.
- They're so different.
- Oh. that's what we love.
Look at them.
Couldn't get two more different people.
How does Roger look?
All dressed up. as if going to a dinner.
[interviewer] Roger Federer.
looking as elegant as ever.
[Ángel] Not a single wrinkle.
Everything perfect.
And Rafa?
He looked like Rambo.
Long hair.
lots of muscle.
the warrior's headband.
One is already thinking about the battle
and the other is keeping his image
of a gentleman. all put together.
It was the perfect combo.
Federer or Nadal.
Which is your favorite player?
Definitely Federer.
- Rafa?
- My future hubby.
We support Roger.
Rafa. of course.
Don't get into any fights
amongst yourselves.
[McEnroe] It was quite interesting
to see how people have to be on.
I guess. one side or the other.
[relaxed music playing]
How can you not like both these guys?
[horn sounds]
People wanted to watch them play.
they were willing to do it
any way they could.
[commentator]
…On a unique and unusual court.
purposely-built for this occasion.
Half clay. half grass.
The battle of surfaces.
Definitely a weird one.
They sold 7.000 tickets
and could have sold triple that.
[reporter] The French capital
has lived the tennis dream
of being able to enjoy a final
between the two best rackets in the world.
Roger Federer will try to break the curse
against his clay court executioner.
[expectant music playing]
[commentator 1] This is a packed house
at Court Philippe-Chatrier
for this men's final.
Roger Federer wanting to win
the French Open for the first time.
[commentator 2] The weight
of expectation is obviously huge.
[commentator 1] Federer wants to prove
he can play the Nadal game on clay.
[commentator 2] That was in!
[Clarey] In any other era.
Federer would have been
the best clay-courter
of that period in time.
But he had a force of nature
that came along his path.
Rafa was creating difficulties for him
that nobody else could create.
In those moments. I was frustrated.
But. you know.
Rafa was just better than me on clay.
You had to hit so many good shots
over a long period of time.
He just made you feel
that you need to play superhuman
on a clay court to beat him.
[line] Out!
[umpire in French] 6-3. 4-6. 6-3. 6-4.
[commentator 1 in English] Rafael Nadal
has three successive Roland-Garros titles.
[commentator 2]
There's so much excitement around this.
It's a portent of things to come.
[fans chanting indistinctly]
[commentator] The boy from Manacor
has made it clear that Roland-Garros
and clay are his territory.
[cheering. chanting continues]
[indistinct chatter]
- Thank you for coming.
- Congrats.
Thank you.
- Uh…
- [man] Next year. the fourth. okay?
We train tomorrow!
- [man 1] Next year. you win again!
- [man 2] Come on. man.
[expectant music playing]
[commentator] With hardly any rest.
Rafa Nadal is off to England.
where his grass season begins.
- Good morning!
Good morning.
[Roig] To me.
winning Roland-Garros
and then Wimbledon is very difficult.
You win Roland-Garros.
then catch the train.
go to London.
arrive at 3:00 or 4:00 in the afternoon.
and one hour later.
start training full-on.
In the end. if you relax a little bit…
you drop a lot.
But Toni always had the feeling
that they could push a little more.
Always.
And Rafa was never
going to give you a little less.
I had to completely change
my mentality and my way of playing.
Wait. then hit. pause. and then. "boom."
Federer on grass.
he's gonna play faster than anyone else.
His tactic is not to give you time.
To be able to beat Federer
on his favorite court.
you have to be aggressive.
On clay. it's slower.
You look for the winning shot
after having played
five shots in the rally.
[cheers]
[Toni] But on grass.
you have to win the point faster.
A bit more forward. Rafael.
Because if you don't. your opponent will.
Forward.
[Rafa] I felt I was well prepared…
to win.
[interviewer] What would
winning Wimbledon mean to you?
If I win here.
well. it's gonna be
my best moment of my career.
[presenter] Coming further South and East.
that's the other part
of the weather story.
We've got some more warm sunshine here.
and across the Southeast. even warmer…
[commentator 1]
What a gladiatorial feel there is
to this Center Court arena.
Nadal has been number 2 in the world
and snapping at Federer's heels.
And Federer. of course.
endlessly the world number 1.
So these are the two boys
who dominate the game at the moment.
And one feels. perhaps.
they're the only players
who can beat each other
in the entire draw.
Something special on the cards.
one feels here.
The final of Wimbledon.
[rousing battle music playing]
[umpire] Roger Federer to serve.
[applause]
Right away. you could see he was already
a much. much better grass-court player.
I had to try to take the ball early
and dictate play that way.
[battle music builds]
[cheering erupts]
[commentator] One set
to the defending champion.
[Rafa] You admit that your opponent.
playing one-on-one.
is better than you at tennis.
So. I have to look for a tactic
that will help me find his weakest point.
where I can really hurt him.
[Toni] After a while. we realized
that when you played
a high ball to his backhand.
he struggled a little more.
So. my tactic was to have him
hit as many backhands as possible.
[tense music playing]
[commentator] Federer struggles
with the high backhand.
[Rafa] High ball to his backhand.
and again.
And again. and then repeat.
I managed
to take that tactic to the limit.
[commentator 2] Most of the balls
going to the Federer backhand.
[crowd cheering]
[commentator 1] One set all.
Which way is this gonna go?
[commentator 2]
Federer is stepping up and going for more.
[Rafa] Toni said to me.
"What you can't fail at
is concentration and motivation."
"Those things that depend
on you and your head.
you can't fail at them."
"They have to be…
at 100%."
[optimistic music playing]
[commentator 2] You're seeing Nadal
at the top of his game on this surface.
Nadal wins the fourth set.
[commentator 2]
The momentum's in his favor right now.
[Rafa] In the fifth set.
I thought I was going to win the match.
[commentator 1]
Nadal serving 2-3. fifth set.
But tennis is about
taking advantage of opportunities.
Especially with Roger.
At any moment. he can break your serve.
[commentator 1] Stunning!
- A break for Federer.
- [crowd cheering]
[Rafa] When he broke my serve…
I think I got really disappointed and…
I wasn't able to focus
a hundred percent on the match.
[commentator 2]
On the ropes in the fifth set.
[tense music playing]
[commentator 1] The only time
we've seen Nadal look displeased.
In the last eight minutes of the match.
I eased up a little bit.
And that hurt me.
[commentator 2]
He's only two points away from losing.
[announcer] 2007 Wimbledon
gentlemen's singles champion
is Roger Federer!
[rapturous cheering]
[triumphant and melancholic music playing]
[cheering continues]
[music fades]
[Rafa] I remember being
in the Wimbledon locker room.
crying… alone.
[thunder cracking]
[poignant music playing]
I thought. "I don't know
if I'll ever be able to win at Wimbledon."
Later. when I talked to Toni.
he told me
that I wasn't at 100% the entire match.
And he was right.
[music fades]
[serene string music playing]
[commentator] The stage is set
at the Barcelona Open
for the Rafa Nadal comeback.
[Rafelet babbling]
[indistinct chatter]
- Only one racket?
- Yeah.
Because I saw Rafelet with another one.
[commentator 2] Rafael Nadal's roadmap
has long since gone out the window.
and now it's day by day…
[commentator 3] Training is one thing.
competing is another.
They're two very different things.
[commentator 4] What is clear for me
is that Rafa Nadal. at this moment.
must already be thinking. undoubtedly.
that his career will soon end.
[interviewer] Rafa. anyone would be scared
after so many injuries.
How do you manage that worry
on a daily basis?
[Rafa] We know the deal.
Am I aware of it? Yes.
Do I know it can happen? Yes. So…
["Shallow" by Lady Gaga
and Bradley Cooper playing on stereo]
[humming. singing along to song on stereo]
[song continues]
[Moyá] Take it easy.
Nothing to prove to anyone.
Just get out there. enjoy yourself…
Tension will be high. you just be relaxed.
Being here is a win.
I know it's not feasible. but…
I go out. and in a corner of my head.
- I win the tournament.
- I know.
Think we don't think that?
The only thing you need
to avoid. 100%. is hurting yourself.
And if something happens to you…
Shit. It'll be devastating.
I know it's not easy.
you've never done it before.
But it's time
to change your mindset a bit.
'cause now. to me. there's no other way.
[emotional piano music playing]
[Rafa] My wife. my parents. my team.
when they see me suffer.
they don't want me to play.
But. to me. things are not so easy.
[crowd cheering]
[Toni] I never told Rafael
it would be easy.
But. well. he got used to…
suffering.
There's a quote by Goethe that says.
"Talent is developed in solitude.
character is formed
in the stream of the world."
[thunder rumbling]
[presenter 1] The rain is falling
and it has been falling
for about the last hour or so.
[presenter 2] Rafael Nadal will.
for the third year in a row.
challenge Roger Federer
for the Wimbledon title.
Because of the rain.
the match was pushing late.
And even before that.
there was so much buildup
and anticipation.
[Wertheim] I mean.
it all added to this sort of classic.
almost biblical quality to this match.
Everyone knew
this was an extraordinary sporting event.
This was really
a momentous occasion in the rivalry.
And the stakes were really. really high.
[cheering. applause]
[commentator] The hope there'll be
enough break in the rain to allow
this men's championship to be played.
The third straight
between Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal.
[commentator 2]
This has the potential to be a classic.
[commentator 3] He's had to suffer
at the hands of Roger Federer.
[commentator 4] The final
that everybody's looked forward to.
[music stops]
[Rafa] "Last year. I failed at Wimbledon
because I wasn't able
to perform at the highest level."
"This year…
I'm not going to fail."
[suspenseful music playing]
[commentator 1] Two sets it is
to Rafael Nadal!
That's incredible.
Nadal. one set away
from his first Wimbledon title.
[Wertheim] Rafa comes out.
wins the first two sets.
And there was this real sense
of concern about Roger Federer.
This was supposed to be his kingdom.
Roger looked really shaken.
You could see it in his face.
It was like Rafa has taken
his hope away from him here.
The match was also tougher. to be honest.
You could feel that he was definitely now
a next-level player on grass.
I knew I needed a mental change.
because you don't want it to…
To linger. you know.
and just have this very negative mindset.
I had to truly believe
I could turn this match around.
[Rafa] I have a big advantage.
but there's still…
a long way to go.
[crowd shouting] Come on. Rafa!
[Wertheim] Between them.
you could see there was this intensity.
And it felt like this was about way more
than the result on this particular Sunday.
Gradually. and then suddenly.
Roger claws his way back into the match.
[crowd cheering]
Rafa likes rhythm. I don't need it.
When there's no rhythm.
I'm the better player.
And I think Rafa also knows
that this type of tennis
can make you extremely tired.
[inaudible]
[umpire] Federer.
Six games all.
Fourth set. tie-break.
[commentator] You didn't think that
he was gonna give this championship away
after five years as the boss.
I wasn't calm at any moment.
It was probably the worst day of my life.
In the fourth set.
we reached the tie-break.
It was. uh.
an extremely stressful situation for me.
Because every point counts.
[commentator] Here we go.
Fourth set tie-break.
[tense music playing]
[fan] Come on!
[cheering erupts]
[commentator] If all seven points
in the breaker are gonna be like that.
the crowd are gonna lose their voices.
There were multiple moments
when they played.
"Anything you can do. I can do better."
[umpire] One all.
They both deeply believed
it was their match to win.
[umpire] Two-one.
Three-one.
Four-one.
Four-two. Nadal.
[commentator] That's wide!
And that could be the crucial blow!
[laughs] Uncle Toni
can't even watch anymore.
[umpire] Five-two. Nadal.
[commentator] He's coached this young man
since he was four years old.
[Toni] Serving. the pressure is on him.
Because 5-2 in the tie-break
of the fourth is almost a victory.
[line] Fault!
[Toni] Fault.
[tense music playing]
At that moment. I was thinking.
"Don't do a double fault."
[line] Fault!
[Toni] Double fault.
[umpire] Five-three.
The moment and the situation
take their toll on me and I make mistakes.
[Roger] He knows that
two or three bad points on his serve
can cost him the match.
And I think that stress
maybe manifested itself.
[crowd cheering]
There were too many missed opportunities.
Moments like these
are to Federer's advantage.
[commentator 1] Stunning!
[umpire] Eight-seven. Nadal.
[Toni] I told Rafael.
"If you have a match point.
serve to his backhand and charge the net.
so you don't think so much."
[cheering erupts]
[umpire] Eight all.
Federer didn't follow my lead.
he didn't miss.
[commentator 2] Championship point's
gone for Nadal.
[umpire] Game. The fourth set.
Two sets all.
[commentator 1]
Nadal has had his heart ripped out.
He must feel absolutely hollow.
[Clarey] Up two sets
and then losing the two breakers
certainly can make him
start to question things again.
Like in 2007.
where he wasn't able to close.
[thunder rumbling]
[commentator 2] The inevitable
has finally struck Center Court.
This band of sort of dark clouds.
it finally produced some rain.
but it has in this…
great exercise at Wimbledon.
[commentator 1]
Back into the locker room once again.
[Toni] When I got to the locker room…
I thought. "Okay. Rafael will be…
he will be very upset. right?
After having lost so many opportunities."
[soft stoic music playing]
[thunder cracking]
[Toni] And I thought.
"What can I say to cheer him up?"
And…
I didn't have many ideas.
And then. Rafael.
who was tying his shoes. said to me.
"I think you can stop the rain."
"I'm not going to lose."
"He may beat me.
but I'm not going to lose. I'm not."
"Mentally. I'm going to be 100%
in every point."
"I can't allow myself
a single moment of weakness."
I was willing to suffer more than him.
[commentator 2]
A brief rain shower has passed.
We've got one more segment
to see if there will be
a Wimbledon champion declared tonight.
[applause]
[Toni] And when I saw him
go back out on the court again.
I knew he would win.
[music builds]
[commentator 2] Six and a half hours
of the entire exercise today.
[Clarey] By that time. it was really dark.
And my screen on my laptop
was just glowing.
They should not have been playing tennis.
But it was tremendous.
[music builds]
[cheering]
Come on!
[inaudible]
[cheering continues]
[Rafa] It was a tough match.
And you couldn't see much.
And I was at my limit.
Just focused on trying
to keep giving myself opportunities.
[Toni] There's always
the temptation to give up.
But when you get used
to enduring a little more…
"That one more ball."
That's what great champions do…
endure one more ball.
[commentator 2]
A phenomenal get by Nadal here.
Now he's got the championship point.
[Rafa] I think Roger.
at that moment. was at his limit.
"He's waiting for me
to serve to his backhand."
"Maybe I could surprise him."
There are no easy balls.
I had given him a ball
where he had time to think.
Sometimes it's easier
to hit without thinking.
[optimistic music playing]
[thunder rumbling]
[Rafa] There's not only
one path to success.
It's probably not necessary
to suffer the stress that I have suffered
to become what I have become.
But I followed the path
that Toni set for me.
And I think it was the right path.
[triumphant music playing]
[cheering continues]
[umpire] Game. set. match. Nadal!
[Rafa] People thought that I was a winner.
I'm not a winner.
I'm a competitor.
Victory…
lasts but a while.
It's momentary.
WIMBLEDON CHAMPION
CONGRATULATIONS. RAFA!
[Rafa] What has always motivated me
is the desire to keep fighting.
'Cause the way I see it.
satisfaction comes
from what's challenging.
[battle music playing]
[music turns serene]
[music fades]